If you've watched my last video, you know I'm working on a deaf alerter for the mancave.

I have an ESP 8266 which can connect to a private wifi network, and get a URL to trigger the alert.

I just need to build a switch - at the options for that are nearly limitless.

My requirements are that the switch unit needs to be an acceptable addition to my Wife's newly fitted kitchen, and needs to be safely and easily operated by my kids.

I sketched up a few designs, but the simplest I could start just with parts I already had in.

I'm going to make a simple sculpture out of brass wire (I've chosen a poppy)
then I'm going to use the brass wire as a capacitive sensor for the esp 8266.

The idea being, you gently touch the poppy in the kitchen, and you trigger an alert in the workshop.




I traced a poppy outline, figured out a single line path and put pins in to guide some of the sharp curves.
I measured the line length with cotton and cut the brass to about 150% of that length.

Wifi poppy sculpture as a capacitive switch

I'm making a rough shape first bending around the guide pins.

Once I have all the right overlaps, on the correct sides of the pins, my plan is to bind the wires together where they cross using tiny brass loops. 

Snagging the right wires and tightening the loops was very fiddly.

And then the final stage was to work around the loop, adding the small bends and shaping then lines.

Having made the poppy, I'm prototyping the capacitive sensor using an arduino nano.
Paul Staffrigan is custodian of the capacitive sensing library, and in my experience anything he is involved in is just a joy to work with.

Here you see it, you touch the poppy wire, change its capacitance and the arduino knows...


Unlike the torch, where I was working within an existing part, I'm going to let the circuit inform the size of the base on the sculpture, so I have a little more room to play with, but I don't want to go too big.
 
It's quite a similar circuit to the torch - it has an

ESP8266 wireless board.
Powered at 3v using an LM1117 linear regulator and a pair of 10 microfarad capacitors for smoothing

Its only a 300K ohm resistor and the internal pull-ups of the esp's gpio add more resistance.


I thought I was going to have difficulties with the sensing library on the little esp8266, but here you can see it sensing the capacitance of a wire, and blinking an LED - even though the sensor the and LED are having to share the same pin.

I trimmed the circuit to size and that gave me minimum dimensions for a base.

When hogging out with a fostner bit, I like to mark the centers and sides of all the overlapping holes before I go to deep on any one. I find this helps reduce chatter.


I'm mixing up a bit of epoxy to hold the brass wire in place, and I'm gaffer taping some foam in as an insulator