When I'm in the workshop, I often can't hear my phone, and my Family can't get my attention.

So inspired by a variety of things, the plan is to turn an LED torch that my Daughter lost the battery cover for, into a deaf-alterer, using a humble ESP8266.

These wireless chips are widely used and have great documention, still I was amazed how quickly I could get this postage stamp sized board hosting a website, with the GPIO pins controlling and LED.

A prototype established that these were the parts I needed to fit into the empty battery compartment of the torch.

If I'd chosen a bigger ESP with fewer GPIO constraints, I wouldn't have need the 7000 invertor chip.

The ESP is one of the first 3v board I've used, so I had to include a 5V to 3V power convertor so I could use USB for power.

Because of 3V limit, I couldn't easily find a suitable mosfet, so I'm using a transistor. Because I can't lower the resistance of the LED panel, I had to use a high side tranistor switch.

I would have liked to use a low side switch, as then I could have also kept the regular torch on/off button functional as well.


Here is the finished control unit to fit inside the torch housing.
I havn't finished the USB power-in, as I need to feed the USB lead in through a hole in the bottom of the torch.

Here I've connected my phone to the wireless access point setup on the esp8266. I've added the flashing mode which will be my alert signal.

This torch was in my parts bin because my Daughter lost the battery cover.
I measured the apperture and modelled a replacement part with an entry port for a USB power lead.
A friend of mine kindly 3d printed me the part. The colour filament wasn't important as I planned to give it a coat of spray black.

So now I need to reassembly the torch.
I bugs me a bit I could keep the original on/off switch working.

There turned out to be plenty of space to run spare cable, but I'd let myself very short tails, so connecting the USB power was a bit of a fiddle.

So there we are - at least the first half of this project is done.

The torch is powered by USB, and acts as a wireless access point for a secured wifi network.
Devices connected to that network can access a URL and make the torch flash.


To make best use of space, I decided to run a brass bus on each of the long edges of my circuit. Whilst this efficient use of space on the protoboard, heating that large mass for soldering proved tricky.
I would have been better learning how to make a custom PCB next time.

The torch is functional and will live out in the workshop. 
Next I plan to work on a child friendly call button that will live in the kitchen, and needs to be as much asthetic as functional.y